New guidelines recommend 30 chest compressions to every two breaths to improve blood flow to the heart and brain
New advice on how best to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) suggests doubling the number of chest compressions, Australian emergency medicine experts say.
This should mean more sustained blood flow, especially to the heart and brain.
The move, which was announced recently by the Australian Resuscitation Council, is now in line with international consensus and best evidence, say the experts.
The new protocol recommends 30 chest compressions to every two breaths when resuscitating infants, children or adults.
The pattern of two ventilations then 30 compressions should continue, to achieve a rate of 100 compressions a minute, says council chair and University of Western Australia lecturer in emergency medicine, Associate Professor Ian Jacobs.
He hopes the one conversion rate for all basic life support rescue attempts and patients would be easier to remember and increase the likelihood people will at least try CPR. 
The new protocol also recommends compressions be delivered faster and harder, people should visualise the centre of the chest and compress there, interruptions should be minimised, a defibrillator attached urgently, other ventilation avoided and says any attempt at resuscitation is better than no attempt.
Kelli Mitchener from the Australian College of Critical Care Nurses and a nurse at Melbourne's Austin Hospital, says the new ratio means better blood flow.
"By increasing the number of compressions it means there will be fewer pauses where blood circulation is not occurring, hopefully improving the patient's outcome," she says.
The changes are based on a review of published evidence which found giving more compressions may help save more lives and a consensus developed by the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation published in the journals Resuscitation and Circulation.
"There are 30,000-35,000 cardiac arrests annually in Australia - due to a heart attack, drowning or drug overdose for example - but less than half receive CPR before an ambulance arrives and most [who don't] will die," says Jacobs.
The guidelines, which are available online, are for the public but include sections for doctors, hospitals and ambulance officers.
St John Ambulance begins teaching the new techniques in its first aid classes from April.