A new lubricant that forms polymers to protect engine wear also saves oil, according to new research
A new smart lubricant that forms a protective film when it meets two surfaces rubbing together means engines need less oil, a chemical conference has heard this week.
Using about 4.5 grams of the lubricant saves more than 450 grams of oil, according to a presentation at the American Chemical Society's meeting this week in Atlanta.
While its inventors do not believe the lubricant can replace standard motor oil in vehicles, they say it may someday replace the oil used to test engines and mechanical systems. 
Additives developed from the same technology could also stave off wear, improve engine performance and reduce pollutants, its developers say.
The technology behind the new compounds is called tribopolymerisation. 
"By tribopolymerisation, we mean the use of small molecules in a fluid, such as an oil, to reduce wear and damage of the sliding surfaces by forming thin polymer films, which offer protection," says US researcher Professor Michael Furey, from Virginia Tech, who developed the process with Czeslaw Kajdas and colleagues at the Radom Technical University in Poland. 
"It is a process of molecular design. We do not add any polymers to the system, nor do we coat surfaces with polymers. Instead, our monomers are designed to form thin polymer films directly on the rubbing surfaces continuously and only where needed," Furey says. 
The international team of scientists has been working on the project since 1981, but recent developments include a precise way of measuring what happens as the films form; the discovery of new classes of compounds, such as the engine lubricant; and agreements with three organisations who hope to further develop and market the technology. 
Furey says that 16 engines recently were treated with about 4.5 grams of the smart composition. 
"All passed the run-in tests successfully with no signs of damage," he says. "In a subsequent series of tests in a different factory location, 24 engines were pre-treated the same way. All 24 engines were in perfect condition after the run-in tests. The results were quite amazing." 
Smelly fumes
He and his colleagues also say the technology could reduce the "emission of smelly fumes" from the use of diesel in trucks, cars, buses and equipment. 
Currently, many countries, such as Sweden, and US states, like California, have imposed limits on the sulfur content of diesel fuels, since sulfur oxide is one of the stinkiest pollutants. 
The catch is that the substitute low-sulfur fuels increase wear and tear on the fuel injector and fuel pump, according to the researchers, who say they have invented diesel fuel "lubricity additives" that work with low-sulfur fuels to reduce their damage on the engine. 
Dr Jorn Larsen-Basse, former director of the Surface Engineering and Tribology Program at the US National Science Foundation, says the technology is "innovative". 
"It works well with metal surfaces, especially steel, because molecules stick onto it easily. The engine pretreatment application might very well be possible," Larsen-Basse says.
The inventors hope to conduct further studies on how high surface temperatures and other engine factors affect the performance of the new compounds.