Power poles damaged by Cyclone Larry, which hit northern Australia last month. But cyclones can be a lot worse, says one expert
Cyclones like Larry are not as intense as we think, says a cyclone risk engineer.
And if we don't get our forecasts right, he says Australia could be left unprepared for the worst.
Dr Bruce Harper, a Queensland-based consultant who has a long association with the Bureau of Meteorology, says Cyclone Larry, which hit the northern town of Innisfail recently, was not as powerful as people think.
He says while the bureau predicted the cyclone would hit land as a category 5 cyclone, with winds of around 290 kilometres per hour, the closest weather stations showed it was a lot weaker.
Harper says a station at South Johnstone, 7 kilometres from Innisfail, showed wind speeds of 180 kilometres per hour.
And the maximum speeds recorded at the nearest offshore station were at Flinders Reef, which measured 240 kilometres per hour.
Both these measurements fall within the definition of a category 4 cyclone.
"My estimation is that it was a low category 4," says Harper, who also advises local and state governments on cyclone risk and insurers on estimated losses from cyclones.
"It wasn't 290 kilometres [per hour] and if it was there would be barely a house standing in parts of Innisfail," he says.
"The community needs to know that cyclones can be a lot worse than this."
Inaccuracy not significant
Gary Foley of the Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne acknowledges the cyclone was weaker than predicted.
But, he says when all the data is in, the actual wind speed will probably be calculated to be just 40 or 50 kilometres per hour less than what was predicted.
"So how does that translate to a person making a response before the storm hits. Do you put in a couple more nails in the roof or something?"
While Harper acknowledges the bureau helped people prepare for a severe cyclone and is keen to emphasise the agency does the best with the technology and resources it has, he says a difference of 50 kilometres per hour could have a huge impact on damage.
And he also thinks that even after final estimates are made the bureau will still be overestimating the strength of Larry and he says such overestimates present broader problems.
Higher and lower estimates
Harper says most predictions of cyclone intensities can't be accurately verified because there aren't enough weather stations collecting data on how strong the winds really are when they hit land.
But, he says, cyclone risk engineers like himself use the closest weather station measurements, along with the actual damage caused by cyclones, to make their own estimates of the strengths of cyclones once they hit land.
This information is used to build models that help develop building authorities to specify standards for cyclone-proof houses.
And the models help insurance companies work out how much money they need to keep aside for cyclone damage payouts.
Harper says estimates by cyclone risk engineers are almost always lower than those provided by meteorological predictions.
And he is concerned that the more widely publicised overestimates from the bureau might lead to public complacency.
It could give people a false impression of cyclone impacts and downplay the importance of building cyclone-resistant buildings, he says.
Uncertainties
Harper says one of the reasons why the bureau is overestimating the strength of cyclones is because there are huge uncertainties in their measurements.
He says the satellite technology they use to measure cloud temperature as a proxy for wind speed is out-dated.
It doesn't take into consideration the fact that cyclones can change rapidly or the fact that the size of a cyclone can affect its intensity, he says.
Harper says the bureau should have more radar to measure actual wind speed, and possibly fly aircraft through cyclones to collect data, as occurs in the US.
And there should be many more weather stations around the country so predictions can be more easily verified and models adjusted accordingly.
The bureau's Foley agrees that, given the funds, better technology and more weather stations would give more accurate predictions but doubts it would be worth the cost.
He appreciates engineers like Harper would like more weather stations but says the bureau can't be expected to be all things to all people and given the uncertainty that exists they would rather err on the side of caution.