Nanoparticles may rescue us from the drudgery of cleaning the bathroom
Cleaning bathrooms could become a chore of the past with new coatings on bench surfaces, tiles and glass that do the job for you, say Australian researchers.
Professor Rose Amal of the ARC Centre for Functional Nanomaterials and team are developing new coatings they hope will be useful for self-cleaning surfaces in homes and hospitals. 
"If you can have self-cleaning materials, you can do the job properly without having to use disinfectants and other chemicals," says Amal, based at the University of New South Wales in Sydney.
Tiny particles of titanium dioxide up to 20 nanometres in diameter are currently used on outdoor surfaces, such as self-cleaning windows.
These titanium dioxide nanoparticles absorb UVA light, ultraviolet light below 380 nanometres in wavelength.
This excites electrons and gives the particles an oxidising ability more powerful than chlorine bleach. 
The nanoparticles can then kill microbes and break down organic compounds from vehicle and industrial emissions into carbon dioxide and water.
Surfaces coated with the titanium dioxide nanoparticles also have another property, called 'superhydrophilicity' that helps them self-clean. This is when water does not form droplets, but rather runs straight off the surface, washing as it goes.
Changing the activating light
But titanium dioxide can only be activated by UVA and this is only present in sunlight, not other sources of light, like indoor light. 
This means that to date self-cleaning coatings have been limited to outdoor surfaces.
Amal and team have been modifying titanium dioxide nanoparticles so they can absorb light at higher wavelengths, in the visible spectrum, over 400 nanometres in wavelength.
They have been doping titanium dioxide nanoparticles with a small amounts of other elements such as iron or nitrogen, in place of titanium or oxygen.
Lab trials show that glass coated with the new nanoparticles can be activated by visible light from a lamp to kill bacteria Escherichia coli, and degrade volatile organic compounds.
"If you can coat it onto a shower room, you don't have to clean the shower room that often," says Amal. "Because of the oxidising properties, fungus will also not grow on the surface."
Outdoor coatings could benefit too
While Amal says the self-cleaning coatings would be useful on tiles, glass screens and benches in bathrooms and hospitals, she says the nanoparticles could also be used to improve outdoor self-cleaning surfaces.
UVA only makes up 5% of sunlight, she says, whereas the ability to use visible light would significantly increase the amount of sunlight that could be used.
"If you use this material outdoors you can utilise more of the sunlight wavelengths," she says.
Funding so far has been through the Australian Research Council but Amal says her team will be looking for commercial support down the track.
She expects it will be another year before the nanoparticles will be ready for large-scale production.
Safety considerations
Amal says recent concerns about the toxicity of nanoparticles should not apply to those in the self-cleaning coatings because they are chemically glued to surfaces with polyethylene glycol, and so are not free to float in the air.
"For this particular application I don't think it should be a problem," she says.