Are your hormone levels going up?
Just anticipating a good laugh is enough to increase the level of feelgood hormones in your blood, a conference has heard.
Previous work has shown that laughter triggers a cascade of beneficial physiological changes.
But researchers presenting a new study at the Experimental Biology 2006 conference in the US recently say they've now shown that merely anticipating "mirthful laughter" before watching a funny video has significant neuroendocrine effects. 
Professor Lee Berk of Loma Linda University in California says people who were just about to watch their favourite funny video had 27% more beta endorphins and 87% more human growth hormone (HGH) than those who were told they'd be reading magazines for an hour.
"We believe that results suggest that the anticipation of a ... laughter ... event initiates changes in neuroendocrine response prior to the onset of the event itself," he says.
Beta endorphins provide natural pain relief and low levels are associated with depression.
HGH is involved in growth, development and cell maintenance and some research suggests it plays a role in maintaining a healthy immune system.
Gags or mags?
Berk describes these effects as "the biology of hope", and says they are linked to the anticipation of a positive mood state.
In the study 16 people where asked to choose their favourite funny video. 
They were told three days before the experiment whether they would get to watch their video or sit in a "neutral room" and thumb through a pile of magazines.
Their blood hormone levels were tested just before the video was turned on, four times during an hour of video watching or magazine reading and three times afterwards.
Berk says the hormone levels stayed high throughout the video and afterwards.
Anticipation can be powerful
Professor Nicholas Keks of Monash University, an Australian researcher whose expertise includes hormones in psychiatry, says anticipation is a powerful emotion in terms of triggering physiological and emotional responses.
"Anticipation is a huge issue in areas that affect our psychology, whether it be anticipation of pleasurable activities or a bit of pain," he says.
"You just have to look at the classic example of salivation before food, or expectation of sexual activity ... I think laughter belongs in that group."
He says the physiological changes shown in the study are probably linked to the so-called "flight or fight" response of nervous system arousal.
"Part of laughter is a general arousal and what that will do is stimulate various hormonal and autonomic systems which go along with arousal," he says.
Berk says he next wants to study cytokine and inflammatory immune responses to the anticipation of laughter.