Playing violent video games can change the way you think, a study says
Playing violent video games can make you think other people are out to get you, research shows.
Dr Sonya Brady of the University of California, San Francisco, and Professor Karen Matthews at the University of Pittsburgh say their study shows that young men are more likely to see others' attitudes toward them as hostile if they've just played a violent game. 
"You're kind of on the lookout for other people being rude to you," Brady says. 
Brady and Matthews had a group of 100 male undergraduates aged 18 to 21 play one of two popular video games.
One game involved car theft and bashings and the second one pitted the player in a race to get homework to school on time.
In the non-violent game, players took the role of a parent and their task was to deliver their child's science project to school before it could be marked late.
In the violent game, players took the role of a criminal, and were instructed by the mafia to beat up a drug dealer with a baseball bat. 
Are you accusing me?
After playing the games, study participants watched a scenario in which a teacher tells a class he suspects some students have cheated in a test.
The teacher says he is very disappointed in those who have cheated but proud of those who did well. 
The teacher then asks to see "Billy" after class. 
The study participants were told to imagine themselves as Billy, and were asked how likely it was that the teacher was going to accuse them of cheating.
Students who'd played the violent game were more likely to think they'd be accused of cheating, the researchers report in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine. 
More likely to approve of marijuana
Brady says the study also shows young men are more likely to think it's acceptable to smoke marijuana and drink alcohol after playing a violent game.
She says this suggests that violent video games make players more likely to throw caution to the wind, whether it's with regard to their own health or any other type of risky behaviour.
"Parents have been told the message that violent video games and violent media in general can influence the likelihood that their kids will be aggressive," Brady says.
"What this study suggests is that they might increase any type of risk-taking behaviour."
Playing the violent game boosted young men's blood pressure, and appeared to have more of an effect on those who came from more violent homes or communities, the study says.
But regardless of whether they grew up in a violent environment, the young men who had played the violent game were less cooperative and more competitive in completing an assigned task with another person, compared to those who played the non-violent game.
The results show the potential for video games to change the way we think, Brady says.