Alkaloids found in magic mushrooms act on the brain to produce changes in perception and hallucinations
An Australian researcher has developed a new test for mushrooms that produces a glowing light if they contain the hallucinogenic ingredients that make them 'magic'. 
Several species of magic mushroom grow in Australia, mainly in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia. 
Nicole Anastos, who did the research for her PhD at Deakin University, describes her work in the latest issue of the Journal of Forensic Sciences.
She applied the method to three species of magic mushroom Psilocybe subaeruginosa, Hypholoma aurantiaca and Panaeolina foenisecii, provided by the Royal Botanic Gardens Melbourne.
The technique uses chemiluminescence, a light reaction that occurs when two chemicals react, to detect psilocybin and its metabolite psilocin. These are the serotonin-like psychoactive ingredients in magic mushrooms.
Magic happens
Not all molecules exhibit chemiluminescence. But mix psilocin with acidic potassium permanganate and psilocybin with ruthenium and magic happens.
Anastos says the technique can detect extremely low levels of psilocin, making it the most sensitive test there is and the first time chemiluminescence has been applied to magic mushrooms.
"In the literature there's quite a few pieces published on the analysis of psilocin and psilocybin in magic mushrooms but the analysis time is quite long in some of them," she says.
"We wanted a rapid method to detect these alkaloids. To date it's the most sensitive method published."
Anastos soaked ground up samples of mushroom in methanol and separated the chemical components using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) before running the chemoluminescence test.
A do-it-yourself test kit?
Anastos says she hopes her research will be picked up and developed for use by the police.
It could possibly also form the basis of a home magic-mushroom test kit or a urine test, she says.
Associate Professor Michael Dawson, head of chemistry, materials and forensic sciences at the University of Technology Sydney says Anastos' work is interesting chemistry.
But he says it doesn't offer any real advantage over existing tests.
Mass spectrometry or ultra violet absorption produced equally good results when testing for psilocin and psilocybin in magic mushrooms, he says.
"Once you've separated the mixture into its individual components ... there's a whole host of detection methods."