Cars run on ethanol would make us less dependent on fossil fuels. But does ethanol meet both energy and environmental goals?
Ethanol fuel is more energy-efficient than some experts had realised and it is time to start developing it as an alternative to fossil fuels, researchers say.
While some critics say the push for ethanol is based on faulty science and mostly benefits the farm lobby, several reviews and commentaries published in today's issue of the journal Science argue otherwise. 
"We find that ethanol can, if it is made correctly, contribute significantly to both energy and environmental goals. However, the current way of producing ethanol with corn probably only meets energy goals," says Dr Alexander Farrell at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Farrell and colleagues looked at six studies used to argue for and against the development of ethanol as an energy source.
"One of the main purposes is to explain why the studies found in the literature have such divergent results," Farrell says.
"Some of the studies use what appear to be obsolete data or data whose quality cannot be verified."
Currently, ethanol is not a significant source of fuel, but is blended with petrol. Environmentalists hope it could be developed as a cleaner source of fuel than oil or gas. 
"The 15.5 billion litres of ethanol blended into gasoline in 2004 amounted to about 2% of all gasoline sold by volume and 1.3% of its energy content," the researchers write. 
Pollution and greenhouse gases?
Farrell says it is possible to put ethanol in a car and run it, but making ethanol using current technology is expensive and contributes to pollution and greenhouse gases.
"[The environmental cost] comes entirely from making fertiliser, running the tractors over the farm and operating the biorefinery," Farrell says. 
Better methods now being investigated would use the woody parts of plants, using what is known as cellulosic technology to break down the tough fibres. 
"Ethanol can be, if it's made the right way with cellulosic technology, a really good fuel," says Farrell, an assistant professor of energy and resources. 
"At the moment, cellulosic technology is just too expensive. If that changes, and the technology is developing rapidly, then we might see cellulosic technology enter the commercial market within five years." 
Fuel, food and chemical from biomass
Writing in the same journal, scientists from Imperial College London, Georgia Tech and Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee say they have teamed up to find ways to make a facility to do that. 
Their facility would make a range of fuels, foods, chemicals, animal feeds, materials, heat and power.
It would use biomass, a collection of renewable plant matter and biological material such as trees, grasses and agricultural crops.
"We're looking at a future for biomass where we use the entire plant and produce a range of different materials from it," says Dr Charlotte Williams of Imperial's chemistry department.
"Before we freeze in the dark, we must prepare to make the transition from nonrenewable carbon resources to renewable bioresources," her team writes. 
An oil industry expert says it is possible.
"Credible studies show that with plausible technology developments, biofuels could supply some 30% of global demand in an environmentally responsible manner without affecting food production," says Professor Steven Koonin, chief scientist for BP in London, writes in a commentary. 
"To realise that goal, so-called advanced biofuels must be developed from dedicated energy crops, separately and distinctly from food."