Scientists hope to gain an insight into the secret life of clouds with Australia's biggest climate experiment
International storm chasers gathering in Australia this week will release more than 1000 weather balloons over the next month as part of the nation's largest meteorological study.
The Tropical Warm Pool International Cloud Experiment, based in Darwin, will provide the world's most comprehensive set of data about the behaviour of thunderclouds, says Dr Peter May, a principal research scientist at the Australian Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne.
May says the study will give scientists better ways of modelling cloud behaviour, resulting in more accurate short-term weather forecasting and better predictions for long-term climate change.
"The biggest uncertainty in climate forecasts and greenhouse calculations comes down to our understanding of thunderstorms," he says.
"The underlying aim of this experiment is to increase our understanding of thunderstorms themselves, how they evolve and the large scale impact they have."
Collaborators in the project include the bureau, the US Department of Energy Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program, the CSIRO, NASA and universities from Australia, the US, Europe, Canada and Japan.
Measuring ice crystals
May says the tropical weather conditions in Darwin, which was devastated by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, provide a natural laboratory for storm watchers.
And this is the time of year for tropical storms, when Darwin has its monsoon-like 'wet' season.
The multi-million dollar study will have three prongs. 
May says research planes will fly directly into the clouds to measure ice crystals while a ground-based network will use radars, laser and infrared systems to look at cloud characteristics and the movement of heat, moisture and light.
And weather balloons will be released every three hours over 23 days from five sites around Darwin.
"This data set is going to be a real resource for the whole meteorological community," May says.
"It'll be the data set that people go to develop new model systems for the next 20 years. There will be dozens, if not hundreds of papers written about this experiment."
May says the link between climate change and global storm patterns is unclear.
But he says it's unlikely that climate change is directly responsible for isolated events, like Hurricane Katrina that struck New Orleans last year.
"The question isn't is a particular storm due to climate change, the question is are we loading the dice so that we can expect more storms or will they be more intense," he says.