The nearby supernova 1987A in its dying moments
Milliseconds before a giant star dies in a spectacular explosion, it hums a note around 'middle C', astronomers say.
In the April issue of The Astrophysical Journal, Professor Adam Burrows of the University of Arizona and team will report the song that immediately precedes the explosion of a supernova.
"We were quite sure when we started seeing this phenomenon that we were seeing sound waves, but it was so unexpected that we kept re-checking and re-testing our results," says Burrows.
Astronomers have long been trying to understand what happens when a supernova, a massive star, collapses and explodes.
Once it reaches death's door, a supernova's core is so dense that it does not allow energy to escape, and the star collapses inwards towards the core.
Until now scientists had assumed that the spectacular explosion in a star's dying moments was due to the star's outer shell bouncing back off the core.
But, says Australian supernova expert Dr Stuart Ryder of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney, none of the models of exploding supernovae to date have supported this theory.
Basically the models don't show enough energy coming from the core bounce to overcome the collapsing outer layers.
"The stuff trying to expand would keep running into the stuff that is still collapsing and it would literally stall the explosion," says Ryder. 
There have been various attempts to tweak the models, including taking account of  neutrinos, which are emitted from supernovae.
But scientists found that these subatomic particles also do not provide enough energy to make the models work. The models still stalled before the explosion.
Sound waves provide missing link
Burrows and team have now developed computer models to simulate the events of a dying star, from the collapse of the core through to the supernova explosion.
"Our simulations show that the inner core starts to execute pulsations," says Burrows.
"They show that after about 500 milliseconds [after the core collapses] the inner core begins to vibrate wildly. And after 600, 700 or 800 milliseconds, this oscillation becomes so vigorous that it sends out sound waves.
"In these computer runs, these sound waves actually cause the star to explode, not the neutrinos."
The researchers say typical sound frequencies in the inner core are about 200 to 400 hertz, in the audible range around middle C.
A million steps
The new models involve a million steps and simulate the full second between core collapse and explosion. 
Previous models, which did not take into account sound waves, had only one fifth the number of steps and simulate only the first few hundred milliseconds after core collapse.
Ryder says Burrows and team could have found the "missing link" in understanding what makes stars explode.
"It seems that we haven't properly allowed for these sound phenomena in the core of the star when it collapses," he says.
"This might be like the death knell or the last alarm bell that something bad is about to happen."