Frogs produce a range of chemicals in their skins, including ones that smell like cashew nuts. Now scientists say some of these chemicals repel insects 
Some Australian frogs create their own insect repellent, some resembling rotten meat and others roasted cashew nuts or thyme leaves, researchers find.
The research team, which includes Associate Professor Mike Tyler of the University of Adelaide and entomologist Dr Craig Williams from James Cook University, publishes its findings online in the journal Biology Letters. 
Frogs produce a number of chemicals in their skin, including hallucinogens, glues and antimicrobials, to ward off infection and stop other animals from trying to eat them.
"We wanted to test Professor Tyler's [belief] that they should also produce an insect repellent," says Williams.
The research team studied five species of Australian frogs, including the Australian green tree frog.
Using massage and acupuncture techniques, they stimulated the muscles beneath the frogs' skins to produce secretions.
"What we found was that frogs produce a variety of chemicals in their skin and these ooze out of the pores of their skin when they are stressed," says Williams. 
The secretions, some of which repel mosquitos, have different smells depending on a number of factors such as what the frog eats.
"The frogs produce hundreds of chemicals and one frog's smell might be made up of six or seven different chemicals, so they all smell quite different," Williams says.
"The chemicals evaporate very quickly from the skin and it's the volatile smell that repels [the mosquitos]."
A new mosquito repellent?
The team found that skin secretions from an Australian green tree frog, for example, protected a mouse from mosquitos when the secretion was applied.
The researchers say this is the first time a vertebrate has been found to have its own in-built mosquito repellent.
But the frog secretion was not as repellent as DEET, diethyl-m-toluamide, the ingredient in most commercial mosquito sprays.
Williams doesn't believe that a new brand of natural insect repellent will result from the research. 
"The smell is just not very good ... some smell of rotting flesh, some of nuts, some of thyme leaves."
Last year the frog-sniffing research team won an Ig Nobel prize for its work on skin secretions.
The prizes honour "achievements that first make people laugh, and then make them think".
At the time, the researchers talked about frog smells that reminded them of Bombay curry and cut grass.