Japanese people traditionally eat eel on the hottest days of summer to combat the heat. Seen here, restaurant owners inspecting their stock ahead of national Eel Day
An ancient mystery surrounding the Japanese eel, a species as prized by fishermen for its high price as it is by chefs for its delicate flesh, has been explained at last. 
Like its Atlantic cousins, the Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) matures in freshwater but then migrates out to sea to spawn.
But where this act is carried out has, until now, been an enigma.
The answer, says a Japanese ocean researcher today in the journal Nature, lies in a tiny triangle of the Pacific Ocean about 2000 kilometres east of the Philippines, near underwater mountains west of the Mariana Islands.
There male and female eels gather in the waning moonlight in the middle of the year, luxuriating in the balmy tropical waters. 
University of Tokyo scientist Professor Katsumi Tsukamoto collected newly-hatched eels during a research trip aboard an oceanographic vessel, the Hakuho Maru, last year. 
The creatures were still in a microscopic larval state and could only be identified with a DNA test.
The scientist pinpointed their spawning site as 14&deg; north, 142&deg; east, to the west of the Suruga seamount in the southern part of the West Mariana Ridge.
The eels had hatched about four days before the new moon of June 2005. 
Just the spot
The site is cleverly chosen, because it enables the hatchlings to be carried northwestward on the Kuroshio Current, which flows towards the coastline of China and Japan where the eels mature in rivers and lakes. 
If the spawning were to occur only a little bit further south, the infant eels could get swept up in the Mindanao Current, which runs southwards down the eastern side of the Philippine archipelago. 
The love grounds of the Japanese eel are tiny when compared to those of its two Atlantic relatives, the European and American eels (A. anguilla) and (A. rostrata), which reproduce in the Sargasso Sea in the eastern Caribbean.
Grilled, steamed, grilled or baked, the eel is a delicacy in Japan, where it is known as unagi. 
Most eels sold for food come from aquaculture. But these eels come from wild eels that are caught and put in fish farms to mature in captivity. 
A surge in demand
As a result of surging demand and disruption to its reproductive cycle, catches of this species have fallen by three-quarters in the past 30 years, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization. 
The price of Japanese eel has soared over the past decade, prompting importers to turn to cheaper European eels to meet demand. 
In turn, this has encouraged dangerously unsustainable catches of European elvers, known as 'glass eels' because they are transparent for the first few years of their life.